## Data Structures - Tree

In this blog post, we'll learn about **tree** data structure, all the jargon surrounding it and different variants of tree data structure.

Image (Random Image)

**Tree is a non-linear hierarchical data structure consisting of vertices (nodes) and edges.** Trees lies on other spectrum of data structure when compared with data structure, which we learnt in the previous blog post() like stack, queue, linked list etc. Stack, queue and Linked list are linear data structure and the elements are added to it in sequence. 

Any operation in linear data structure has increasing time complexity with increase in size of the data, which makes it less suitable for the fast computing real world problems. **Increasing time complexity is avoided by using non-linear data structure.**

Image(Tree)

### Jargon

* **Vertex/Node** - It contains the key or value or pointers to child vertex. Bottom most node is called as **leaf node or external node**. It has **no link** going down from it. A node having a child node and is below root is called **internal node.**
* **Edges** - It is a link between two node.
* **Height of a Tree** - It is the height of the root node or the depth of the deepest node.
* **Height of a Node** - It is the number of edges from the node to the last leaf (deepest node) of the tree.
* **Root** - It is the top most node 
* **Depth of a Node**-  It is the number of edges from the root to the node.
* **Degree** - It is the total number of branches of that node.
* **Forest** - It is the collection of disjoint trees.

### Types of Trees

There are various tree data structure but some of the widely known tree data structure are as follows

* Binary Tree
* Binary Search Tree
* AVL Tree
* B-Tree

We'll discuss each of these tree data structure separately in another blog post.

### Tree traversal

To perform any operation on a node, we should traverse through a path in tree to reach that required node. In linear data structure, because of sequential linearity, traversing is simple and only one way to pass through. In non-linear data structure, we have different ways to reach a node. To find a smallest node in the tree, we should traverse through all the nodes in the tree.

**In General, a tree is traversed from root and then to left child and then right child.** It is not mandatory to traverse through tree in any predetermined way, if required, one can traverse from bottom-up or top-down with random intermediate order between internal nodes. However, random traversing will never benefit in performing the task efficiently. Thus, we should follow a set of traversal techniques.

Image (Tree Traversal)

During traversing, a basic structure of tree must be followed by 

* each node must have data.
* each node might have left and right child.

we should consider each such node with child as sub-tree because, these child nodes can further have more sub-nodes.

Image (Traversal Subtree)

If our goal is to traverse through whole tree, then we should traverse through left sub-tree first and then root node and then right sub-tree. Depending on the order of our traversal we have three traversal.

**Variants of Tree Traversal**

* In-order Traversal
* Pre-order Traversal
* Post-order Traversal

**Inorder Traversal**

1. First, visit all the nodes in the left sub-tree
2. Then the root node
3. Visit all the nodes in the right sub-tree

**Pre-order Traversal**

1. Visit root node
2. Visit all the nodes in the left sub-tree
3. Visit all the nodes in the right sub-tree

**Post-order Traversal**

1. Visit all the nodes in the left subtree
2. Visit all the nodes in the right subtree
3. Visit the root node

### Implementation of Traversal Using Recursion

```python
class Node:
    def __init__(self, item):
        self.item = item
        self.left = None
        self.right = None
        
def inorder(root):

    if root:
        # Traverse left
        inorder(root.left)
        # Traverse root
        print(str(root.item) + "->", end='')
        # Traverse right
        inorder(root.right)
    

def postorder(root):

    if root:
        # Traverse left
        postorder(root.left)
        # Traverse right
        postorder(root.right)
        # Traverse root
        print(str(root.item) + "->", end='')


def preorder(root):

    if root:
        # Traverse root
        print(str(root.item) + "->", end='')
        # Traverse left
        preorder(root.left)
        # Traverse right
        preorder(root.right)
    


root = Node(1)
root.left = Node(2)
root.right = Node(3)
root.left.left = Node(4)
root.left.right = Node(5)

print("Inorder traversal ")

inorder(root)

print("\nPreorder traversal ")
preorder(root)

print("\nPostorder traversal ")
postorder(root)

"""
Inorder traversal 
4->2->5->1->3->
Preorder traversal 
1->2->4->5->3->
Postorder traversal 
4->5->2->3->1->
"""
```

Recommended reading for recursion: [How does recursion work?](https://realpython.com/python-thinking-recursively/)

Image Recursion traverse

Above Recursion Program:

**Remember each function call in recursion is stored in stack, once function call is done it is removed from stack and each call has its execution context !**

* For in-order traversal, First, we pass the complete tree to **inorder** function.
* Check if condition is true or not? since tree is not empty, we move inside **if block**.
* Next, we make recursion call with root's left child (node 2, here), again a recursive call is made with node 2's left child that is node 4. 
* Next, we check the condition with node 4's left child. since no left child is present for node 4. Now the unwinding starts happening in recursive call.
* Now, 4 is printed and then node 4's right child is checked for if condition, there is no right child for node 4. it comes out.
* Next, 2 is printed then node 2's right child is checked for if condition, we have right child here, that is node 5, again recursion starts. 
* similar we move from left to right, until we reach last right node 3.

Note the **base condition** for our recursion is that all the nodes are traversed, making **if root:** condition by making it empty!

### Application

* Binary search tree is used for efficient searching of an element in the tree.
* Heap is also a tree, used for heap sort.
* **Popular Databases **uses B-Trees and T-Trees
* **Syntax tree is used in compilers while executing an program.**