## Binary Search Tree

In this blog post, we'll discuss about the binary search tree, as the name mentions, the tree is widely used for performing search operation over the sorted list of numbers. 

IMage 

Each node in BST has at most two children and BST performs search with time complexity of **O(log(n))** where **n** is the total number of nodes in the BST. To generate binary search tree from a sorted list of numbers, so we must follow a set of properties:

* All the left nodes are lesser than root node
* All the right nodes are greater than root node
* Sub-trees under each node should follow same properties as BST.

Image BST (A tree having a right subtree with one value smaller than the root is  shown to demonstrate that it is not a valid binary search tree)

Basic Operations in BST

* Search
* Insertion
* Deletion

**Node Object**

```python
class Node:
    def __init__(self, value):
        self.data = value
        self.left = None
        self.right = None
```



**Search:** For search operation, the BST follows the divide and conquer strategy, it splits the sorted list into two, one forming the left subtree and other forming a right subtree. Now based on the number to search, we move either into left or right subtree. 

Image(Search_BST) - Javatpoint

* Compare the element with the root of the tree. 
* If the item is matched then return the location of the node. 
* Otherwise check if item is less than the element present on root, if so then move to the left sub-tree. 
* If not, then move to the right sub-tree. 
* Repeat this procedure recursively until match found. 
* If element is not found then return None. 

**Insertion:** For insertion operation, we must keep in mind, that the properties of BST is not violated while inserting the element at its appropriate location. 

Image (Insertion BST) - Javatpoint

* Allocate the memory for tree. 
* Set the data part of the node to the value and set the left and right node's object of tree, point to None. 
* If the item to be inserted, will be the first element of the tree, then the left and right of this node will point to None.
* Else, check if the item is less than the root element of the tree,  if this is true, then recursively perform this operation with the left  of the root.
* If this is false, then perform this operation recursively with the right sub-tree of the root.

 **Deletion:** Deleting a node is quite tricky, consider we are deleting a internal node with two child node, then we should assign a appropriate parent node to the child node if required or we should replace the child node with parent node (that needs to be deleted), then delete the parent node. 

There are three scenarios while deleting the node while simultaneous following the property of BST.

* Node to be deleted as no child node or its a leaf node
* Node to be deleted as one child node
* Node to be deleted as two child node

**Deletion - Leaf Node:**

Image (deletion_BST_1)

Simple case, just replace the leaf node with None and free the space allocated to it.

**Deletion - Node with one children**

Image(deletion_BST_2)

Replace the node to be deleted with child node and then delete the child node.

**Deletion - Node with two children**

Image(deletion_BST_3)

It is little complicated compared to previous cases. 

* Get the in-order successor or predecessor of the node that needs to be deleted.
* Replace the node with the in-order successor or predecessor
* Remove the in-order successor or predecessor from its original position.

I recommend reading what is in-order traversal from previous blog post to understand what is in-order successor or predecessor.

**Binary Search Tree Implementation**

```python
class node:
    def __init__(self, item):
        self.item = item
        self.left = None
        self.right = None
        
def inorderTraversal(root):
    if root is not None:
        inorderTraversal(root.left)	
        
        print(str(root.item) + "->", end=" ")
        
        inorderTraversal(root.right)

def insertion(node, key):
    if node is None:
        return node(key)
    
    if key < node.item:
        node.left = insertion(node.left, key)
    else:
        node.right = insertion(node.right, key)
        
    return node

def minimumValueNode(node):
    current = node
    
    while current.left is not None:
        current = current.left
        
    return current

def deleteNode(root, key):
    
    if root is None:
        return root
    
    if key < root.key:
        root.left = deleteNode(root.left, key)
    elif key > root.key:
        root.right = deleteNode(root.right, key)
    else:
        if root.left is None:
            temp = root.right
            root = None
            return temp
        
        elif root.right is None:
            temp = root.left
            root = None
            return temp
        
        temp = minimumValueNode(root.right)
        root.key = temp.key
        root.right = deleteNode(root.right, temp.key)
        
     return root

"""

root = None
root = insertion(root, 8)
root = insertion(root, 3)
root = insertion(root, 1)
root = insertion(root, 6)
root = insertion(root, 7)
root = insertion(root, 10)
root = insertion(root, 14)
root = insertion(root, 4)

print("Inorder traversal: ", end=' ')
inorder(root)

print("\nDelete 10")
root = deleteNode(root, 10)
print("Inorder traversal: ", end=' ')
inorder(root)
"""
Inorder traversal:  1-> 3-> 4-> 6-> 7-> 8-> 10-> 14-> 
Delete 10
Inorder traversal:  1-> 3-> 4-> 6-> 7-> 8-> 14-> 
```

**Time Complexity**

| **Operation** | **Best Case Complexity** | **Average Case Complexity** | **Worst Case Complexity** |
| :-----------: | :----------------------: | :-------------------------: | :-----------------------: |
|    Search     |         O(log n)         |          O(log n)           |           O(n)            |
|   Insertion   |         O(log n)         |          O(log n)           |           O(n)            |
|   Deletion    |         O(log n)         |          O(log n)           |           O(n)            |

**n** is the number of nodes

**Applications**

* Multilevel indexing in Database
* dynamic sorting