---
layout: post
title: Version Control System Series Part - I
description: Git Basics
category: Blog
date:   2021-04-01 13:43:52 +0530
---
## What is Git?
Git is a free and open source distributed version control system designed to handle everything from small to very large projects with speed and efficiency.

Git is easy to learn and has a tiny footprint with lightning fast performance. It outclasses SCM tools like Subversion, CVS, Perforce, and ClearCase with features like cheap local branching, convenient staging areas, and multiple workflows. 

## Why Git?

* It is a Distributed Version Control System.
* Multiple users can keep different versions of their code.
* Easy to track and rollback if anything goes wrong.
* It allows changes from multiple people to be merged into one source.

### How to install git?

*cmd:* **`sudo apt-get update`**

*cmd:* **`sudo apt-get install git`**

### How to find git Version?

*cmd:* **`git --version`**

### How to setup the username and email for git?

*cmd:* **`git config --global user.name "mayur"`**

*cmd:* **`git config --global user.email "mayur@xyz.com"`**

### How to create a repository?

*cmd*: **`git init sample_repo`**

It creates a *sample_repo* folder with git support.

### How to check if the repository is created or not?

*cmd:* **`ls`**

*cmd:* **`cd sample_repo`**

**Shows the hidden files in git repo**

*cmd:* **`ls -a`** 

The above commands creates git repo from scratch. But if you have an existing project which is loitering around without git support then,
You can move to the main folder of that project in terminal and then type the command as cmd: `git init`

Note: **`git init`** without the Repository name takes the folder name as Repository name and you check the **`.git`** file in the project folder after **`git init`** command. I've used  **//** to write comment next to the command, it will be incorrect to copy/paste it.

### How to change the name of the project name of the git repository.

To change the project name of the git repo, just move the folder to new folder as below (new folder will be created automatically)

*cmd:* **`mv sample_repo/ git_basics_lessons`**

### How to remove the git support from the project

To delete the git support from a project, we can delete the .git file from project folder

*cmd:* **`rm -r git_basics_lessons/.git`**

### How to commit a file?

*cmd:* **`git init git_basics_lessons`**

Above command enables the git support for the git_basics_lessons folder

*cmd:* **`nano README`** 

Above command creates a readme file with nano editor

**save the ReadME file**

*cmd:* **`git add README`**

Above command makes the git to keep track of the changes in the file, it helps not to send all unnecessary files to repository.

*cmd:* **`git commit -m 'Added a README file'`** 

-m refers to message while committing the file. It will commit the changes locally.

### Edit the existing the ReadME & Commit again

*cmd:* **`nano README`**

*write few lines to the files*

*save the file*

### Commit changes in the ReadME file

*cmd:* **`git commit -a -m "new feature statement added"`** 

-a (includes all the changes)

### Staging  Area 

**It helps in selecting exactly what we need to commit**

### How to find the status of the repo.

*cmd:* **`git status`**

*We won't see any interesting messages in status command unless we made any changes to the file without committing it or added new files without committing it.*

### Add few files in git repo

Lets creates two files with name file1 and file2, then find the status of the repo.

*cmd:* **`touch file1`**

*cmd:* **`touch file2`**

*cmd:* **`git status`**

**The git status will show the two files which are untracked.** 

### Add file1 that needs to be tracked 

*cmd:* **`git add file1`**

*cmd:* **`git status `**

**The git status will show us two messages, First, the file is added but didn't get committed and second is the file2 is untracked.**

*cmd:* **`git add file2`**

*cmd:* **`git commit -m "Added two files"`**

*cmd:* **`git status`**

### Making changes to file1 and file2

*cmd:* **`nano file1`**

*write few lines in file1*

*save the file1*

*cmd:* **`nano file2`**

*write few lines in file2*

*save the file2*

**Since we had already added the file in repo before, git sends the status as the files are modified but not added to commit.**

*cmd:* **`git status`**

### Commit the modified file1 and file2

*cmd:* **`git add file1`**

*cmd:* **`git commit -m "changed file1"`**

*cmd:* **`git status`**

*cmd:* **`git add file2`**

*cmd:* **`git commit -m "changed file2"`**

*cmd:* **`git status`**

### How to view history of commits made 

**Each commit is named with a unique hash value as follows 'commit e279hf92h9823e39....'**

*cmd:* **`git log`** 

**we can view what each commit was, the commit identifier. By giving partial identifier detail like e279, we can extract what was committed to repo.**

*cmd:* **`git checkout e279..`**

**It will give us the details of the commit, like check out the status of repo at that time of commit. And we can checkout files, which we added during that commit or made any changes in the code during that commit.**

*cmd:* **`cat file1`**

*cmd:* **`cat file2`**

### To move back to our current status of repo with all the changes that has been made, we can checkout from main branch (previously instead of main, master was used).

*cmd:* **`git checkout main`** // 'master' is the branch name of the repo

### How to find the difference between the two different commits by using the commit identifier.

*cmd:* **`git diff gh887 hjk89`**

*This will show the difference between the two commits. gh887 and hjk89 are commits identifier as mentioned earlier.*

 We've seen a series of commands from creating repository to adding and manipulate files in the repository. We have checked out how to view history of commits and understanding the status of git repo using hash value of the commit. We'll look into branching and merge concepts of git into second part of the blog.

 Thanks for reading.